Rooftop Rainwater Harvesting
This is the best and most effective method of harvesting rainwater for apartments as it is less expensive and if implemented efficiently, helps in augmenting the groundwater level of the area. This is a system of catching rainwater where it falls. In this method, the roof becomes the catchment, and rainwater is collected from the roof of the building, which can either be stored in a tank or diverted to an artificial recharge system.



a) Storage of Direct Use
    In this method rainwater collected from the roof of the building is diverted to a storage tank.Water from storage tank can be used for secondary purposes such as washing and gardening etc.  
b) Recharging groundwater aquifers
    Commonly used recharging methods WITH DISCRIPTION::::

c) Recharging of bore wells
   Rainwater collected from rooftop of the building is diverted through drainpipes to settlement or filtration tank. After settlement filtered water is diverted to bore wells to recharge deep aquifers. Abandoned bore wells can also be used for recharge.
d) Recharge pits
    Recharge pits are small pits of any shape rectangular, square or circular, contracted with brick or stone masonry wall with weep hole at regular intervals. Top of pit can be covered with perforated covers. Bottom of pit should be filled with filter media.
f) Recharging of dug wells
    Rainwater from the rooftop is diverted to dug wells after passing it through filtration bed. 
h) Percolation tank
    Percolation tanks are artificially created surface water bodies, submerging a land area with adequate permeability to facilitate sufficient percolation to recharge the groundwater. 













USE OF WATER BY BUILDING CONTAING SYSTEM::::


Catchments
The surface that receives rainfall directly is the catchment of rainwater harvesting system.

Transportation
Rainwater from rooftop should be carried through down take water pipes or drains to storage/harvesting system.

First Flush
 It will  help in cleaning of silt and other material deposited on roof during dry seasons Provisions of first rain separator should be made at outlet of each drainpipe.

Filter
There is always some skepticism regarding Roof Top Rainwater Harvesting since doubts are raised that rainwater may contaminate groundwater. 

Now the filtered water can be used for various purposes.......... 









1.3 BENEFITS OF RAINWATER HARVESTING
*Rainwater is a relatively clean and free source of water .
*Rainwater harvesting provides a source of water at the point where it is needed .
*It is socially acceptable and environmentally responsible .
*It promotes self-sufficiency and conserves water resources .
*Rainwater is friendly to landscape plants and gardens .
*It reduces storm water runoff and non-point source pollution .
*It uses simple, flexible technologies that are easy to maintain .
*Offers potential cost savings especially with rising water costs .
*Provides safe water for human consumption after proper treatment .
*Low running costs.









Why should I implement RWH?
   In India, rainfall occurs in short periods of high intensity, allowing the rain falling on the surface to flow away fast. 
This leaves little scope for recharging the groundwater, which results in water scarcity in most parts of the country.
 Through RWH, this erratic rainfall can be conserved, stored & used as per convenience, either directly or for recharging groundwater.


What is the cost involved?
   The cost will vary depending upon the catchment area and the conveyance/ storage structures finalised.
 RWH can be installed at a very low cost in large plots where public buildings, schools & colleges are located, and this cost is negligible to the total construction cost, if integrated with the building design.


What are the legal guidelines and their implication for recharge pit sizes?
   As per the law, you need to store or recharge 20 litres for for every sq.m of roof area and 10 litres for every sq.m of non-roof (ground surfaces such as parking, backyard) area.
 This is for plot sizes of 40x60 sq.m or more. 
 For e.g. if your home has about 100 sq.m of roof area, and about 50 sq.m of non-roof area, then you will need to create capacity for at least 2500 litres of  water. 
If you are using a 1000 litre tank to store rainwater for immediate use, you can connect the overflow to a 4000 litre (3 feet x 20 feet) recharge well.






FERROCEMENT TANKS 
----Costs
Ferrocement tanks: US$26 - $50 per m3 storage depending on size (e.g. 11m3 for US$550, 46m3 for US$1,200). Experience from the RAIN Foundation seems to indicate a cost of between 40-100 Euro per m3 storage for ferrocement tanks (including everything like materials, transport and labour). Partial below-ground ferrocement tanks have also been made where part of the structure is underground and part is above ground - US$24.5 per m3 storage (e.g. 10.8m3 for US$265).
In Kenya in 1993, a 20 m3 tank with a roof cost US$ 420 (US$ 21 per m3). In the South Pacific Islands in 1994, 5.5–12 m3 tanks cost an average of US$ 50 per m3.





 Recharge trench cum injection well

In this technique, 1 to 2 m. wide and 2 to 3 m. deep trench is excavated, the length of which depends on the site availability and volume of water to be handled.
 An injection well of 100 to 150 mm diameter is constructed, piercing through the layers of impermeable horizons to the potential aquifer reaching about 3 to 5 metres below water levels ( 1 to 10 m.) from the bottom of the trenches. 
Depending upon the volume of water to be injected, the number of injection wells can be increased to enhance the recharging rate.





